# cranial_covariation
# please cite this manuscript with any use of this data: Monson TA. 2020. Patterns and magnitudes of craniofacial covariation in extant cercopithecids. The Anatomical Record.
Patterns and magnitudes of craniofacial covariation in extant cercopithecids
Tesla A. Monson, Western Washington University
The Anatomical Record
ABSTRACT
The cranium contains almost all of the vertebrate sensory organs and plays an essential role in vertebrate evolution. Research on the primate cranium has revealed that it is both highly integrated and modular, but studies have historically focused on covariance between the neurocranium and facial skeleton rather than on bones specific to special senses such as vision. The goal of this work is to investigate patterns and magnitudes of craniofacial covariation in extant cercopithecids with particular attention to the orbits. This study takes a quantitative approach using data collected from 38 homologous cranial landmarks across 11 genera of cercopithecid monkeys (Cercopithecidae, N=291). These data demonstrate that both patterns and magnitudes of craniofacial covariation differ across Cercopithecidae at subfamily, tribe, and genus-levels, with strongest integration in the papionins (and specifically Papio) and significantly weaker covariation in the colobines, particularly Presbytis. Orbital height does not covary with other measurements of the cranium to the same degree as other cranial traits in Cercopithecidae and is highly constrained across the family. This study has important implications for our understanding of the evolution and development of morphological diversity in the cercopithecid cranium and evolution of the primate eye. This study also highlights the potential error of broad assumptions about generalizing patterns and magnitudes of modularity and integration across primates. Additionally, these findings reiterate the importance of trait selection for interpreting fossil taxonomy, as craniofacial covariation may impact phenotypes commonly used to differentiate fossil primate species.
METHODS
This study used a landmark-based morphometric approach to test for significant differences in patterns and magnitudes of craniofacial covariation in cercopithecid primates. Thirty-eight homologous cranial landmarks were identified on the crania of N=291 cercopithecid primates spanning 11 genera from both subfamily clades (Cercopithecinae and Colobinae; Table 1; Fig. 2). Individuals sampled for this dataset are held at the Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History (NMNH), Washington, D.C., and the Anthropology Institute and Museum (AIM) at the University of Zurich in Switzerland. From the identified homologous landmarks, TAM took 17 cranial measurements that capture cranial length and breadth as well as individual cranial modules, focusing on the neurocranium, face, and orbits. All measurements were taken on skeletal specimens in museum collections using Mitutoyo digital calipers (at the NMNH) and dialMax analog calipers (at the AIM) and following standardized protocols (e.g., Monson et al., 2017). Only adult individuals with fully erupted third molars were included in the sample. As the vertebrate cranium is a bilaterally symmetric structure (e.g., Klingenberg et al., 2002), measurements were taken from the right side of the skull for mirrored traits (e.g., orbital height) unless it was damaged, in which case measurements were taken from the left side of the skull. Definitions of all measurements included are available in Table 2. All raw data are reported in Supplementary Material (Table S1).

